Welcome back! In this
chapter we are going to
discuss fault tolerance and health.
First, we are going to
have a look at
how to apply all the different
fault tolerance policies that
we discussed in an earlier chapter
to your Quarkus applications
and of course, try that out and practice.
Then we are going to have a look at how
to implement a health check that is
monitored by OpenShift and have a
guided exercise about that as well.
As usual,
at the end of the chapter,
we have a challenge review lab.
So we now know how to invoke
downstream web services from
our application code as a
REST client. Now it becomes
very important to be able
to handle failures as well.
Fault tolerance policy implementation
in Quarkus use SmallRye
Fault Tolerance
and it is an implementation
of the MicroProfile Fault
Tolerance specification,
which means that we have
got multiple strategies
available to implement
or to handle failures.
The ones that we have discussed,
Circuit breaker, Bulkhead, Fallback,
Retry policies and Timeouts.
All have their own specific annotations as
prescribed by the MicroProfile
Fault Tolerance specification.
However, the Asynchronous
policy defined by
the Fault Tolerance specification
as well has been left behind.
So it's not included for 2 reasons.
First, it's not a fault tolerance
policy and in and of itself,
but it's rather a technique of
decoupling requests from the response.
And second, Quarkus already does integrate
Asynchronous and reactive
programming technique in the core,
which makes Asynchronous
an obsolete annotation.
Let's take a look at all
of these annotations
one by one, starting with timeout.
So timeout is meant to prevent
the client code from waiting for too
long to get a response from a
web service it has invoked.
It is a very simple annotation.
It simply has a value which is long type,
and it is the maximum amount
of time that the request that
is happening in a method may take
before the method is interrupted.
Actually, it is the maximum amount of
time the method can take to complete
because timeout is a
method level annotation.
And of course, because the value
means nothing without a unit,
we do have the ability to specify
the unit as a field of
the ChronoUnit class.
By default, the timeout is
specified in milliseconds.
If the timeout is exceeded,
then a TimeoutException is raised,
which you can then handle with
other fault tolerance annotations
as we are about to see.
If a request fails,
it might be because the downstream web
service you are invoking is flapping.
It might be available,
but then it might
intermittently be unavailable and
then quickly become available again.
And in that case, it might help,
if you try again 2 or 3 times.
The Retry policy, using the Retry annotation
is capable of doing that for you again,
you can annotate the method that
you want to keep retrying like this.
So the getProduct method, it
supposedly invokes
downstream web service somewhere, can be
annotated with the Retry annotation,
which has a number of
additional parameters such as
maximum number of retry attempts, a delay.
So the amount of time
between the subsequent
retry attempts
that the code will wait.
Of course, delayUnit that
is paired with a delay and
a maximum duration that it
may take for the retries
to attempt to get a response.
This may be very useful with the
combination with jitter.
Because jitter can actually
add a random amount of
time or subtract random amount of time
from each wait between retries.
So you do not exactly know,
especially with large jitter values,
how long 3 attempts may take.
You may have said that maximum
number of retries is 3
but if your delay is,
let's say 1 second and
your jitter is half a second,
then 3 attempts may take as
little as 1 second or as long as 4.5,
so you may want to specify
a maximum duration as well.
Both maxDuration and jitter also have
their own respective unit parameters.
Now the interesting thing about
retries as they can be selective.
Well timeouts cannot be selective when
a method is taking more than
x amount of time to complete,
we will simply raise an
exception. With retries
we can be selective about when we
perform retries. What is a failure?
What kind of an exception do
we consider worthy of retrying?
And in which cases we
will simply not retry
and these 2 conditions can be specified
with the retryOn and abortOn,
which are both arrays of classes.
That is, arrays of exception types that we
want to either retry upon or give up upon.
When timing out, retrying,
services can still fail.
If we can timeout,
we can retry up to a specific amount
of times and still not get a response,
so it's very useful to be able to return
some sort of a meaningful response rather
than a stack trace of an exception.
The @FallBack annotation allows
us to specify a fallbackMethod.
So for example, and say the product,
the getProduct method contains
REST client or database code.
It's not just limited to REST, right?
That may fail. If it fails,
assuming all other policies we may have
configured on this method also fail,
we can have a @FallBack annotation
pointing to a fallbackMethod.
But there is a big condition here.
Note that the fallbackMethod is a string.
However, whatever method we
mentioned in that string must
have the same signature as the original
method. So the same parameters,
the same return type.
Otherwise, we will get
a compile-time error.
Another option is for
FallBack method to define an
entire class that contains
methods that are able
to handle FallBack
responses. In that class
then we just need to have a
handle method which accepts
an ExecutionContext as a parameter
and returns some sort of a string.
Of course it must be
accessible, that is visible
from the original class where
we have annotated the original.
Tricky method.
So the only 2 parameters we can use with
the FallBack annotation
are either the method,
which is the method we should call or
without any parameters, we can simply
specify the class name of the
class that we want to invoke.
Circuit Breaker is a very
powerful method of failing fast,
not causing any worse
damage than it already is.
Whereby we can simply tell
the circuit breaker that it
should stop invoking whatever
the method is doing.
If it receives a failure
under certain conditions
and then not even retry for
a specified amount of time,
just open the circuit,
fail every time we invoke the
method, fail immediately.
And then after a specified
amount of time, try
tip toe around that method and
see if it succeeds and if
it still doesn't succeed,
keep the circuit open.
But if it does succeed,
then put the circuit
into half closed mode.
And if it keeps returning success,
eventually close the circuit and
start using the method again.
This is particularly
useful for methods that
either take a long amount
of time before they fail,
which is something that we cannot afford,
for example. We could
mitigate this with timeouts,
but still, what if you have a method
that even in the case it's successful,
takes a long time to complete,
but then it takes even longer,
when it returns an error.
You cannot easily handle
this with a timeout.
A circuit breaker is
perfect for that though.
On the other hand, we have good
use case in circuit breakers
for downstream services
that may be stressed,
may eventually periodically enter
non-responsive state because of overload
and we just simply do not want to add to
that overload by sending in more requests,
which I'm going to be
served anyway because
we are going to timeout before they do.
So, circuit breaker is very
useful for those situations.
It is again as usual, a method annotation
and it has a couple of
very important parameter.
So it is an annotation and why
it's fully qualified
here, it doesn't need to be.
Let's look at the
parameters. Of first of all,
the requestsVolumeThreshold
is the number of consecutive
requests we monitor.
The failureRatio is the share
of those requests that we
monitor that are allowed to fail
before we trip the circuit open.
So with the requestVolumeThreshold of
2 and a failure ratio
of 0.5, that's 50%
even a single request that
fails will trip the circuit
open. With the requestVolumeThreshold
of, let's say 4
and the failure ratio of
0.75, 3 out of 4 consecutive
request must have failed.
So as for the circuit to open and not even
attempt to use the downstream
or to use the method anymore.
The delay,
and of course, the accompanying delayUnit
is the amount of time that circuit stays
open after it's been tripped by
failure ratio having been reached.
And then the successThreshold
is the number of
consecutive success
invocations in the half
close state before we close it again
and stop worrying about the results.
Then there's also, of course,
the failOn and skipOn
methods that allow us
to be selective about when
to use the circuit breakers.
So we can skip the circuit breaker
on specific types of exceptions
whereas we can include specific recognized
types of exceptions in the failOn,
which are again both as with retry,
there are arrays of exception types
that we want to consider.
Lastly, the Bulkhead pattern
allows us to limit the amount
of stress that we send towards
the whatever downstream service
we are using from our method.
It is simply a thread
pool for client threads
that our method invokes
or our method triggers.
For example, with our getProducts method,
if we annotate it with
the @Bulkhead annotation and
specify that the value is 5, 5
concurrent threads will be allowed
to enter the getProducts method.
Once 5 threads are waiting for
the getProducts method to complete,
any subsequent invocation will
either fail immediately or will
be placed into the waitingTaskQueue
if we've configured that one.
So these are actually the only 2
options for the Bulkhead annotation.
The value itself is the number of
concurrent requests that is allowed.
The waitingTaskQueue is
the number of waiting threads
that can be placed
into a waiting state
and of course, as current
pending request complete,
waiting threads from the queue are
allowed to invoke the method as well.
It's important to know
that of course,
if we are running our
application in a container,
in a pod and we create
multiple instances of that pod,
this is local to just a
single instance, right?
So if we set the bulkhead
on a method to 5,
and it's invoking a downstream database,
for example, which can handle
5 concurrent connections.
If we create 2 additional
instances of our pod in OpenShift
for example, that means a maximum
of 15 concurrent connections.
You should bear that in mind
when configuring bulkheads.
Of course, you can provide
multiple fault tolerance policies
to a method at the same time.
And if you do, they are processed
in a very specific order.
So the first one,
if the circuit is currently open,
the Circuit Breaker policy will throw
an exception, if you have
configured one on the method.
If not, if you have the Bulkhead methods
configured and its queue is full,
as well as the waiting or
the pending client list,
then it's the Bulkhead that
will throw an exception.
If none of the previous ones throw
an exception or if they do not exist,
then we invoke the original method.
Then if it takes too long,
the Timeout policy will interrupt us.
Otherwise, if there is no Timeout,
the Retry policy may retry the request,
adding to the total time, of course,
which means that Retry and Timeout can
also be combined with great effect.
And then of course, if the Retry or
the Timeout have failed or any
of the other ones have failed,
then the Fallback method will return
the shortcut response. When you are
mixing the Retry and
Circuit Breaker policies,
it's also important to know that
the Circuit Breaker records
each Retry as a failure.
So it tries to
use Retries to compute the circuit
status using the threshold window,
the failure threshold
over a window of attempts.
The same rule also applies when using
Circuit Breaker and the Bulkhead policy.
So Bulkhead attempts and
failures, count as failed
invocations to the circuit breaker.
It's very nice to know also that
the Fault Tolerance specification
seamlessly integrates
with the MicroProfile
config specification
and of course also the
Metrics specification
but we are going to talk about
Metrics later in the course.
What does that mean?
It means that you can actually
annotate your methods
simply by adding specific properties
to your application.properties file.
So what you do is you would use
the fully qualified class name
followed by a slash and the name of the
method that you're trying to annotate,
followed by another slash
and the policy that
you want to configure
followed by another slash,
and the list of properties for
that particular policy,
so one property at a time.
If you want to provide an annotation
instruction for the entire class,
for the annotations that support
class level annotations,
simply leave out the method.
Like in this following example,
it would be the fully qualified class
name followed by the policy name,
followed by the attributes
that you want to configure.
We are going to review metrics,
as already mentioned in a
subsequent chapter in this course.
But since we've mentioned fault
tolerance and metrics in,
in conclusion, Fallback
annotations as well as others.
generate a specific metric,
such as ft. name.fallback.calls.
total, where the name is
actually the fully qualified
name of the class
plus the method and this metric counts
the number of times that the
fallback method has been invoked.
But there are also similar
metrics automatically
generated for other policies as well.
Although Quarkus does rely on
the SmallRye implementation,
fault tolerance, there are
other alternatives that you might want
to consider for one or another reason.
Hystrix, for example is
a third party library
and it is an implementation
of fault tolerance
that also supports MicroProfile
requirements.
Hystrix does have also
other features such as
latency, monitoring,
concurrency capabilities,
and the web user interface turbine
that you can use for monitoring
metrics and identifying
problems. Of course,
the one perhaps downside to Hystrix
is that it does require in some cases,
quite a bit of coding to
integrate with their code.
So it's not as easily
annotation driven as SmallRye is.
Now if modifying your code
or application properties,
as we have seen, it's also possible to
do it as a matter of configuration.
If neither of the 2 is possible,
you might want to consider using
Red Hat OpenShift Service Mesh
or its upstream project, Istio.
Because this is a different way,
a non-invasive way from the
perspective of your application of
configuring fault tolerance as a
matter of platform functionality.
So the sidecar pattern
is used by Istio and
Service Mesh to takeover
the communication from your application
and act as a proxy to your app,
whereby the proxy can then
implement various policies
without your application even
knowing anything about it.
There are 2 main benefits
to this approach, which are,
the first is that the entire configuration
is outside of the application,
so you do not need to recompile, rebuild,
restart the application if
you are changing the policies and
the implementation also resides
outside of the application itself,
which means that it is a
language agnostic application.
So you do not really need to use
a specific language or execution
environment to use it.
Also, it's got a centralized
configuration stores,
so you can actually use
policy collection that you
then selectively apply to
all your applications from a
single point of configuration.
Let's stick with SmallRye
and in the next video,
let's have a look at how to apply
fault tolerance policies
to the Quarkus application.
See you there.